Blog for the Symplectic Integrator Project in Geant4 (#1176)
HSF/hsf.github.io: _gsocblogs/2022/blog_Geant4_DivyanshTiwari.md

---
project: Geant4
title: Symplectic Integrators
author: Divyansh Tiwari
date: 27.07.2022
year: 2022
layout: blog_post
logo: Geant4-logo.png
intro: |

>   Implementing Symplectic Integrators 

Reviewer: The introduction must not be just a title, it should contain a sentence telling the readers what they are going to read about.

Author: Made the requested change

---

## Introduction

> Many applications require the use of integrator method that preserve evergy over the course of a simulation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many applications require the use of an integration method that preserves the energy over the course of a simulation.
```

> Hence, the aim of this project is to implement multiple methods which do not accumulate errors in energy and phase space volume over a large number of integration steps.A famous class of methods which fulfill the above criteria are the symplectic integrators.

Reviewer: You can just copy this verbatim as `intro` text above.

## Getting Into The Program

After going through the list of projects, I decided upon the one I was going to apply, pretty early on. I was really interested in the physics behind the symplectic integrator. I also had some prior experience of working on implementing them. I mailed the mentors with my interest in the project, following which I received a qualification task. I submitted my solution to the task and after that, worked with my mentors to develop a project proposal. The projects were announced in may and I was selected!

## Starting Off - The Community Bonding Period

This was a very essential period. I had my first meet with my mentors and I got to know a bit about their works. We figured out the logistics of how we'll be planning out the 3 month long coding period. I also got to attend the GSOC'22 Global Summit and learnt about the importance of open source. The rest of the community bonding period was utilized on brushing up my basics as well as learning to use the Geant4 toolkit.

## Coding Period - Kick Off

> Before starting work on the actual methods, it was important develop up a test bed application that could be used to test the steppers and drivers. Hence, I started off my coding period by implementing a geant4 application to track a particle in a geometry initialized with a magnetic field. This was really interesting and exciting for me as I had done my homework during the community bonding period. The test bed is comprised of a detector constructor class, a physics list class and a primary action generator class. The magnetic field of the geometry and the stepper used for tracking the particle can defined in the detector constructor. The physics list is used to define various particles and physical processes. Finally, the primary generator was used to initialize the particle. I utilized the test bed to test out various steppers already present in the codebase to profile them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before starting work on the actual methods, it was important to develop a testbed application that could be used to test the steppers and drivers. Hence, I started off my coding period by implementing a geant4 application to track a particle in a geometry initialized with a magnetic field. This was really interesting and exciting for me as I had done my homework during the community bonding period. The testbed is comprised of a detector constructor class, a physics list class, and a primary action generator class. The magnetic field of the geometry and the stepper used for tracking the particle can be defined in the detector constructor. The physics list is used to define various particles and physical processes. Finally, the primary generator was used to initialize the particle. I utilized the test bed to test out various steppers already present in the codebase to profile them.
```
